All right, folks. So, this is the April
1st budget hearing, Board of Finance,
Town of Andover. We'll go ahead and
start the meeting. We'll start with the
Pledge of Allegiance. I pledge of
allegiance to the flag of the United
States of America, and to the republic
for which it stands, one nation under
God, indivisible,
>> indivisible,
>> with liberty and justice for all.
>> For all.
Right. Then
>> Heather,
>> give me one moment. Oh, Heather's here,
too. Good. Good.
>> I am. Yep. Hi, Heather.
>> Good. Good.
>> Is Kim with us or not?
>> I don't see her yet.
>> Um, Liz, I don't know if you if you
heard before you joined, Nick is
traveling. I don't think we're going to
get him tonight.
>> Okay. And I did not hear that. Is Louise
on?
Yes, I see her.
>> I am. Hi, Louise.
>> Hey, Louise.
>> Hi.
>> Her pretty face.
>> All right, so we need to do public
comment. Uh, I'm going to go through my
I have a long list here. Uh, many of
which is you folks, but I'm going to go
in the order that it's on my screen. So
the first on there that is not a member
of our board is an creme select board
member
>> and you're muted if you're trying to
talk
>> if Yeah. Or I can come back to you. No
big deal.
All right. I'll come back to Ann. Um,
let's go with Jed Larson.
>> Hello. Just uh came to watch the
presentation. Maybe I'll have a few
questions after, but primarily here just
to learn.
>> Very good. Thank you. Uh, Jen
Mcoldendrick.
>> No comment. Thanks.
>> There's Kim.
>> Oh, great. Welcome, Kim. Uh Joanne,
>> hi everyone. Um you are going to have
comment again uh Rob after you do the
presentation. Is that the way I'm
understanding it?
>> You know it's it's
looking at the agenda
>> and it doesn't have it. So
>> the agenda does have it. The agenda says
receive comments from the public
>> and then closer.
>> Number three.
>> Number three. Right. It said budget
presentation number two and then
comments.
>> Oh, I'm looking at maybe I'm looking at
a earlier version where before she fixed
it. Okay.
>> Yeah. I've never seen it this way to be
truthful. There's usually it's it's way
different than this. This is a whole new
process this year because usually you'll
have a budget workshop involved in this
as well after comments from the public.
But you know, whatever you want. I'll
Are we?
>> No, no. I I I want there to be public
comment after. So, I'm I I I want it to
be that way.
>> I just I'm going to double check right
now, Joanne, because
>> when I got an email from Kate with the
agenda.
>> Okay.
>> It was it was set up a little
differently. So, hold on one moment.
>> Sure.
>> I'm just going to double check here. Um
here's the packet.
Yeah. Okay, great. So, actually, I'm
doing it wrong. I apologize to
everybody. We're going to actually stop
the public comment because again, I had
an older version of this agenda and I
had the wrong agenda. So, it's actually
straight into public the budget
presentation and then we'll do comments.
So, let's just do that then. Apologies.
Uh, I guess it must have changed. So I
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
share my screen and we're going to go
through our budget presentation as it
currently exists.
So give me one moment.
>> So Rob, let me can I just say one thing?
>> Yeah, go right ahead.
>> Again, we don't have Eric, so we really
this is kind of our first time kind of
winging not winging but doing it without
his um his help. And in the packet, the
packet is the actual budget.
Um, it's the actual spreadsheet, you
know, all the pages of the budget. So, I
guess I was kind of thinking I wasn't
really sure what was going to happen
tonight. Um,
but then I saw that packet and I was
just wondering if if we were going to be
going through this actual PowerPoint or
what we were doing.
>> Oh, I I fully intend to go through the
PowerPoint. Uh, it everybody should
understand this is our best draft at at
the current moment. We um we reserve the
right obviously to tweak it based on
both both public comment what we do at
our meeting tomorrow night and if we
have our meeting uh next Wednesday night
where we can make some other decisions
and changes but this is
>> okay
>> how it is right now. I was going to run
through it.
>> All right. So, okay. Here we go.
All right. So this is well not so much
tonight's agenda but this is we're going
to talk about the budget process. We're
going to talk about major expenditures.
We have some summary documents. We have
a calculation of taxation and miller
rate and then we'll do questions at the
end. As we know we have public comment
coming up.
So, as everybody probably knows, but in
case you don't, uh we get preliminary
budgets from the board of selectmen and
or the various town departments and
commissions and we kind of put them
together with the help of the treasurer
into a budget document.
Uh the board of education proposes their
budget.
We talk about it, they talk about it, we
go back and forth. We uh we did a couple
meetings ago I believe uh ask them if
they could get down to a smaller
increase 7.5
and their response the response from the
board chair was no that's not workable.
The board of finance then reviews and
adjusts town ops and capital budgets. We
do this hearing. We do a finalization
and then we go to town meeting which is
next Thursday the 9th in the gym
and then we have the second the
referendum coming up which is a combined
I believe we changed it in the charter
last time around we did the charter
revision where you have a referendum
that encompasses both RAM and our town
budget.
So, oops, sorry, scrolling too fast. So,
this is what we're looking at right now.
Uh, the BU board of education budget is
asking for just a hair under a half a
million dollars increase. It's just
about 11%.
Uh, we'll get to why later. Ram,
and this is a little complicated and
we'll get into it later, but they're
asking for about a 3% increase.
Uh although there's a there's an
asterisk to that and we'll come back to
it. And then the town budget is looking
like
I'm not sure this slide is actually
right guys but um it's looking like I
thought it was about more of a 6%
increase. So we have to look at this
slide again but they are looking for an
increase as well.
And so we get to about a 6% tax
increase. Again before going into this
meeting I I thought we were about 6.8.
So I have to double check that.
This is our sort of pie chart of what we
spend on various things. RAM, AAS, the
town, and the town's capital funds. Bear
in mind with the with the education
budget, obviously we also get from the
state a fairly large chunk of money.
It's about $2 million in education cost
share grant money. That's not displayed
here. This is just expenditure.
Uh so the budget drivers on the town and
the town capital. Uh we are increasing
our legal retainer fees because we have
some projects coming up that we think we
need legal advice for. We have a number
all throughout the budget of salary
increases whether contracts obligated or
not. Some employees are in the union,
some are not. uh you'll see when we go
through you know if you go through the
the budget detail and if we get to that
later there are a lot of like 3%
increases that is I would say most of
the line items are that there it's not
all of them but most of them we also
need a we've decided or the board of
selectman and the board of finance has
agreed that we need a administrative
assistant for the town administrator by
the way. A note on that. My
understanding is we have just agreed to
hire one. Uh finally, we have
gone ahead and made that decision
because we've been without a town
administrator now for
four months, 5 months.
So the feeling was that the when we had
Eric in that position that there wasn't
enough support for him that there wasn't
enough there to help him to free him up
to oversee projects and whatnot and that
an assistant was necessary. So there's
some funding in this budget for that.
Similarly at the community center uh we
also put in money in this budget for an
assistant to help Tess I believe is our
director there who I think has been
confirmed as that director now and we
are we that's part of why this that line
item is up as well. We have some
increased funding for more programs at
the the community center. The idea being
that we want to build out the use of
that building, get more out of it, but
that costs money.
>> And then we did
>> Yep.
>> Louise. Um for the uh town
administrator, um you didn't mention
that we had an interim for a few months.
>> Yeah,
>> we did. We did. It's true. We had we I
apologize to to you and to Jim who
helped us out for a couple of months. We
did have an intro,
>> but we haven't had a permanent position.
So my understanding is we have now
at uh on Monday night I believe the
board of selectmen agreed to
pick one and hire a permanent hopefully
permanent
uh position there. But yes, good point.
And then finally, we decreased our
capital expenditures a little bit, and
we'll get to that later, but we made
some small cuts, some actually some some
increases as well, and it nets out to a
small decrease about 3% 2.92%.
So, let me move this because this is
really annoying. Okay, so this is our
revenue side. We have property tax
revenue keying off our grand list. We
have what's called intergovern
intergovernmental revenues that is
primarily I believe in this budget uh
the ECS education cost share grant. Uh
we charge a little money for various
services. None of these are projected to
increase and investment interest. This
is our money where we have money saved
up. We have it in what's called a stiff
account. uh I don't remember the exact
meaning of the acronym, but it's a state
uh bank account that we could get decent
interest in and we have in the last few
years tried to move more and more of our
money into it. 150,000 I think is
roughly what we made last year out of
it. So, we've left it there. That gives
us a little bit of an increase in
income. That's pretty small, but every
little bit helps.
So, this is a history uh just to give
everybody context for where we are and
where we're going. Right? So, this I did
a 5-year look back as to what the town
operating and capital budget combined
has been costing us over the years. And
if you look at this, uh there were some
years where we increased, some years we
were flat. Even a year where we were
down, that was last year. And this year
the proposed increase again it's coming
out to about 4%. Again I when we get
through this I want to double check that
number but
the idea is that if we pass this budget
over the course of six years that's the
increase
that you would see on the town side.
Capital budget. This is the sort of the
last decisions we made before coming
into this meeting.
We have some things that we do like
clockwork like reval. This is us saving
up every year. Every five years roughly
we do a reval. Although this year's was
pushed off one year to I believe the
state actually requested to put it off.
So we save up
for the cost of that revaluation. It's
for the assessor to go around and value
all our houses. The contingency fund.
This is something that we save up for in
case we need it. We generally don't. So,
we're going to put in the same amount
and hope that that is sufficient this
year as well. Last year's I hope we will
use very little of and hopefully get
some money back. The multi-use building
fund we talked about at our meetings uh
repeatedly.
There's, I believe, over $400,000 in
that fund. There are various possible
uses for it. At the same time, we've
gotten some grants for things like the
generator that is going to hook up the
fire department, the town hall, and the
community center allin-one. We got a big
grant for that. So, that helps us out.
And we talked to the board selectman
about it and decided that this year we
could go ahead and not load money into
that fund. It doesn't mean that fund is
zeroed out. It just means we're not
adding to it this year.
Similarly, the fire equipment fund. The
fire department has received some new
equipment of late. We know they've got
some money left in there. We know we
have a request coming this year, uh,
sorry, this budget year. So, the budget
that we're talking about now for about
$65,000 for a compressor unit that will
help them uh fill up their air tanks.
But even with that request and even with
the lease payment on the firet truck
that we now have, we felt it was okay to
reduce this by a little bit, just a
slight amount, but we're still loading
$125,000 in there. So, most of these we
left alone. Uh road road work for
instance. Uh last year we get actually
cut this. We used to put in a little
more. It used to be 410. We cut this
down to 385 to get the budget passed. we
left at this time. Uh I think we're
making very good progress on our roads
personally and I think it's a good idea
to keep trying to make those pro that
progress. Same with the trees. I think
we've done a really good job there. I
don't know if you guys have noticed, but
I certainly have that whenever we have a
really big wind day. I don't lose trees
aren't down everywhere. A few come down,
but it's not like it used to be. So that
is valuable. Bridge and culverts. Again,
we didn't change it. We're still
building this up and the reason for that
is that we have a number of projects in
town that need to be looked at and we
have
when we do a bridge and culvert project
and it's for our town roads not a state
road we only have the ability to do a
grant. Okay. So, we would be on the hook
for half the project cost. And my
understanding based on discussions with
public works and Eric before he left and
so forth is that this could be a
situation where we could be out a
million dollars at a shot. So, we're
trying to keep up on that and that's why
we left that alone.
>> The building maintenance fund, uh,
there's some work that needs to be done,
uh, I believe down at the public
workshed and whatnot. and that we decid
we agreed to leave a small increase in
that was requested
and oop sorry and then the open space
fund. So this is the fund where we save
up money in case a piece of property
comes on the market and the town can
purchase it potentially. We had a
situation oh I don't know how many years
ago it is probably at least at least
five years ago now where a piece of
property came on the came on the board
and we simply did not have a fund
available we didn't have a mechanism to
purchase it. So this fund exists so that
we can build up money to take advantage
of that. If it's say it's near the rail
trail or near other town property, we
could purchase it and utilize it. So
that in the end at the end of the day,
that all nets out to a small decrease of
$30,000,
about just under 3%.
All right. So, the BOE request, they're
asking for an 11% increase.
They have a number of things, number of
reasons why um this
I was going to delete, but anyway, they
have
two things going on that are before you
even get to staffing, they have a huge
increase coming in on their health care
costs. This is affecting the town as
well. I should mention this affects
everybody. The town uh and the school
and various other towns and their
schools are all in a healthcare
consortium and that consortium
negotiates rates and unfortunately this
year we're getting hit with a gigantic
increase that is infecting both the town
and the school but the school has many
more employees that are on insurance. So
it sort of from a dollar value
standpoint affects them more. Uh they
also lost some grant money associated
with their school psychologist. So
that's affecting them. They have their
negotiated union contract with roughly
3% raises. I forget the exact number but
it's about 3%. And there's uh they
believe they need to meet the needs of
the kids of the school an extra sixth
grade teacher for next year.
So this is sorry I have options here I
should have put it in but this is this
is a more detailed version but it's the
same basic idea um the school
psychologist
which was funded by grant is no longer
and the rest of this Yep. I think you
should point out there was a $45,000
grant that we used to get. So that
psychologist used to cost us $45,000.
Now it's cost $20,000 because we no
longer have that grant.
>> That's right. That's it. It was a half
grant. You're correct. So thank you,
Bill. So this is basically the same
idea. Um so that those are their big
numbers. Uh and it results in this. If
we look at their history, this is again
like we did with the town, the look back
of five years.
So this one is
over time if you if all I don't know how
many people remember the 2021 year, but
this was a year where enrollment had
dropped and so there was actually a
decrease. We had a flat budget and it's
been slowly increasing and kind of
picking up steam ever since.
and the enrollment has shifted. One
thing I did not do with this chart is
put in the enrollment numbers. I felt it
would make it a little more complicated,
but you could do that. Uh, and
basically, if you take this number here
and you were to pass it, this is the
percentage increase over six years.
And if memory serves, if you do a very
raw per pupil calculation,
just take their total budget, divide by
the number of students, 192 I believe
we're at right now, you get back to
roughly what the budget was per student
here.
So, it's a big increase. No question
about it. Uh it's almost 11%. Big deal.
uh at the same time you know up until
here uh and as you may remember last
year the request was 8.8 8. The board of
finance after the budget failed
ultimately stepped in and cut it to
five. And so this is the number that the
board of board of education sorry
believes that they need to meet the
needs of the school.
RAM.
So they have a 3.3 increase coming at
RAM. One thing to remember about RAM is
that RAM's costs
start at a higher base. It's a middle
high, not an elementary entry. And if
you look at their pupil, per pupil
expenditure, it starts out at a higher
number. They also discovered a little
problem. They had
money built up in their savings account,
if you will, and they're only allowed to
have so much in there. And apparently
the auditor and the superintendent and
so forth missed for about 5 years now
some overages where they owed us money
back but haven't provided it. So they
had sent us a memo on Friday
indicating that the three towns would be
receiving money back as what they called
an offset for our levy. The exact
details of that, how that's going to
work are still somewhat up in the air,
but this is our number 255 234.
So if you do the offset, so what they're
asking for for a budget, this is the
real number in a sense of this is what
it costs for them for their for their
budget to pass. However, this one year,
and this is a oneshot thing,
it would do kind of the opposite where
it decreases our levy. Now, we talked
about this on the board a little bit, at
least offline. I think the board's going
to talk about this some more tomorrow
night, but my my impression is we should
think about this number as the real RAM
number
and then understand that we're getting
this money back as a as some kind of
transfer or offset. Okay. The other
thing that's affecting this is our
student body at RAM. We they always do a
calculation between the three towns who
has this many students that many
students. I think we have a tw 129
students down there right now and our
levy percentage decreased. So even
although their number goes up 3.3 that's
why you see this number here 3.07. The
reason these don't match is that our
levy percentage went down. We have fewer
relative to the other 10.
So this is again this is the surplus. We
talked about it already. I won't belabor
it. Um this is the levy history over
time.
So
we have gone down and this is again like
we said without incorporating within
this slide the change in enrollment. A
lot of this is decreased enrollment for
us
and that's why you see a lot of negative
numbers on here. Ram will increase their
budget but our levy will drop because
Hebrin and Marorrow have more students.
So this is their actual budgets. This is
their total budgets. I went back through
I went on their website. I went on
Hebrin's website. I pulled the numbers.
And so in actual fact over 6 years if we
pass this budget they're up about 12%.
modest if you think about it 2% a year
roughly like that but
it's not the same if you look at this
versus this is our levy and this is
affected by the number of students we
have in there this is what they're
actually spending
so we have taxation in this town is
based off of our grand list however
something we haven't run into for
if we exceed the bill rate of 32.46
our automobile levy can't go higher than
that or or rather a mill rate can't go
higher than that. So right now we're
higher than that. So we would have to
split the two and produce two different
mill rates. One for the auto, one for
personal property and real estate.
So, this is I did a five-year look back
because I sat there thinking one night I
even though I've been on the board of
finance for 10 years, didn't remember
every single year that we changed our
budget and what we did with taxation.
This is Andover's tax history. What we
raised by taxation, what we're actually
taxing the town over a 5-year period.
And then, by the way, this is the actual
I want to point this out. We we have
some errors up top. This is the actual
tax increase request that I calculated,
which is 6.8%.
Which is a significant number. It's a
higher number than we've seen in many,
many years. As you can see here,
if we were to pass it,
we'd be looking at this over six years,
13.5 over six years, because we had some
years where we were either just about
flat. Even last year, I don't know if
everybody remembers, we actually had a
small decrease and we had some increases
up here that were, I would say,
moderate. So, you'd have a cumulative
total of that if we were to pass this
budget.
This is just mill rate calculation. This
is looking at our grand list. This is
our grand list number. This is 1 mil.
But again, if we are above that
particular percentage, you end up with a
split.
for your
so depending on what you have for auto
versus your home,
it's going to affect that.
So that was that's sort of the end of
the presentation and I apologize for
everybody where we have some potential
discrepancies in here. I believe this is
the this is the number we need to talk
about right here, but we need to go back
through and double check some of this
stuff. I uh I apologize for any
confusion, but I'm going to stop the
presentation there since that is what I
have for now and I'm going to open it up
a little bit before we get to public
comment just for the board. If you guys
have any little comments here and then
I'll go to public speak. I'm going to go
stop sharing for a moment.
Okay.
Um,
so guys, we had a couple slides there
where the numbers aren't quite the same
in terms of the u the town budget. I
thought we were at 6%. But there were
some slides where we had we were lower.
Does anybody recall why that happened?
>> I do, Rob. It's because you took a
$30,000 cut in capital and that town
budget is a cumulative of the um because
I just did the calculation. It's a
cumulative change of your town budget
and your capital together. If you put
those two together
so 6.12 that's ops
>> that's just yes that doesn't include
>> okay
>> y
>> okay apologies everyone that's why I got
mixed up fair
>> the actual increase really for is the
lower number of three
>> 3.9 I think it was
>> 3.92 of the
>> I didn't think it was 6% but yeah
>> yeah 6.12 it's it's 6.12 from a ops
perspective Mhm.
>> But then we we cut a little bit of
capital.
>> Capital would be a negative 2.92.
>> So a different Yeah. Yeah. Then the net
of the two of them is 3.92 increase.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> Fair enough. I just don't want to
mislead anybody. I wanted to make sure
our slides were right. Thank you.
>> Yep. But the total by taxation though is
up. Right. That so that one that number
is correct.
>> I think the 6.8 is right.
>> 6.8. Right.
And everybody should think about it this
way. Just the really quick and dirty way
of thinking about it is that last year's
amount to raise by taxation was almost
exactly $10 million. It's a little bit
higher. So every $100,000
is a percentage point if you think of it
that way in terms of what we're right
raising for taxation, right? So if you
manage to find $100,000 in cuts, you get
to 5.8. If you manage to find 200, 4.8.
roughly. Uh so that's that's a way an
easy way to think about it. Uh and again
to the extent that we get low enough,
you might have uh the ability to
recombine that mill rate. Right now
we're I believe we're above the mill
rate threshold for the auto. So you have
that split. And whereas if we were to
cut down and get down to 3 32 I believe
46 is the number then you then you just
have 1 mil rate. Again, we've never run
into this before. We've always been
under the threshold.
All right. So, here's what I'm going to
do. Uh, if if nobody else at the board
has commentary, I'm going to go ahead
and go around the horn in terms of
public comment and see where we end up.
So, I'm going to go right on my list
here. Uh, the first person I see is
Scott Persan.
Scott,
>> can you hear me?
>> Now I can hear you
>> a little bit in and out.
>> Tell you what, I'll come back to you,
Scott. You just I think you just logged
in. Um, Ashley Hilton.
>> Oh, hi. I I I I was really here to
listen. I don't have a public comment
prepared. Um, can you hear me? Okay. Um,
I guess I'd just like to thank the the
board of finance and the board of
education. That explanation was really
clear and I appreciate it. Um there are
some some big jumps in some places this
year but I think it's very clear that
that we need them uh particularly for
the school to maintain the services with
the school. So I guess I'm speaking in
support of the budget how you currently
have it written and thanking um both of
the boards for all of their detailed
work this uh budget season.
>> Thank you Ashley
Bata.
Good evening. Thank you everyone on the
boards for all your hard work in
preparing this information. Um very
educational, very informative. I don't
really have any comments. Thank you
again for your time.
>> Thank you. By
brienne Lindier.
>> Yep. I'd just like to say as a parent um
of a child in the school district, I
would urge everybody to pass this
budget. um you know making an investment
in our children's future is important
and making sure the school is well
funded is part of that and I know that
um a lot of people you know expressed
issues with you know being on a fixed
income you know I want to remind
everybody that we we all are on fixed
incomes um you know whether you are
working for a private employer or or
retired um we're all capped at a certain
amount so you know I think that um to
make sure that we are making an
investment in our future. Um that's what
we're doing. We're investing in the
future. Uh it's been proven that good
schools bring in higher property values
and protect the future. So
okay,
>> thank you.
>> Uh Kate,
>> hi. Can you hear me? Okay. Yes.
>> Okay. Um I just wanted to briefly say um
thank you so much for such a thorough
review of both the town budget and the
school budget. Um I hope that everyone
on this meeting tonight understands that
the school budget is bare bones the way
that it is written. We don't have funds
that we can put money into um within the
existing school budget. Um, we do have
money in our capital fund on the town
side which is currently being used for a
bathroom renovation project that's going
to be done this summer. Um, and I just I
just hope that everyone understands like
everything has been cut to the point
that it can be currently. Um, and I I
really appreciate um our town and what
we've put into it in the past few years.
I know a few years ago there was a town
increase of 16%. Um, and I think it was
important. I think it's important that
our town budget is where it is now. And
you can see that when you look at our
roads, when you see how we're plowed
during the winter, and when you see the
amount of tree removal and bridge repair
that's been done. So, I just I think
it's important for us to do that for
everyone. Thank you.
>> Kate,
uh, Jerry,
>> hi. Can you hear me?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. Robert, I want to thank you from
the board of finance. You put in hours
upon hours of work into this. I think
it's very thoughtful. It's well
presented and I appreciate everything
that went into it. I want to say thank
you and tell you I support both the town
and the school budget. I think that you
can only go so far
always saying no. You're going to
eventually cause a
a decrease in what your district is
going to look like. Um, and it won't be
a a good
a good decrease. It'll be I think
Brienne
kind of articulated very well that you
need to invest in this school as well as
the town. Town has been taken care of
and the school needs to be taken care of
and I'm all for it. Thank you very much.
Thanks, Jerry.
>> I'm gonna come back to Jed Larson. Uh,
it didn't work before. Jed, you
>> Oh, wait. I'm sorry. Did you already
>> Well, I'm I I do have a couple of
questions at this point if I could.
>> Yeah, go right ahead.
>> First, uh, thanks for all the hard work
putting this together. When I was
looking through the the package uh on
the spreadsheet there, it was talking
about there was a significant drop in
the cost of electricity and I didn't
know if that had to do with the solar
panel installation or what caused that.
>> I believe that's the answer. Yes. Uh we
are projecting some decreases. Well, I
let me rephrase that. There's a couple
different places I think in our in the
budget where you're going to see some
reduced expectation for electricity
costs. I think with the school it's
about the solar
and maybe uh some insulation work
whereas at the town I think it's more
about the installation of a heat pump
system at the town hall
>> and
sorry go ahead Liz. Yeah, I was going to
say I don't think this I don't think um
the school budget is in this packet. So
I think the electricity that he's
talking about is town related and there
was some on the town
>> we were
>> and I don't think the solar panels are
actually up and running yet last I
heard.
>> I mean they're going in that but it's an
expectation. I know in the in this this
hoping for some savings, but
>> yeah.
>> Um off the top of my head with respect
to the town,
>> I think I think it might be that at
least a little bit the hybrid system
that they put in uh at town hall.
Instead of using older air conditioners,
they have some mini splits in there now.
Uh, and a hybrid. I believe it's a
propane slash heat pump.
You know, depending on the temp you
could set it.
>> Okay. But, you know, my comment is it
was
good to see a significant drop in the
electricity, however it got there. So,
that was I thought that was good news to
us. the uh
with regard to the capital budget, you
know, and I I thought we had had the
comment from somebody last year that we
should put how much are how much exists
in the different funds and I know we
kept the uh like the bridge and covert
fund is the same and I know we're
getting ready to do the work on the
Bizola Road, Lake Road cover and I don't
know from the presentation if we're in
good shape with respect to that or not,
but I know that's going to be a very
expensive undertaking. I don't know
what's in the fund.
>> Yeah, that's a really good that's a
really good point. Uh we did look at
that. The part of the issue we had with
our uh kind of brand new uh relatively
brand new treasurer was sorting out what
was in our capital funds
um
versus you know since the last audit. We
have an audit that's almost complete
that would get us to June 30th of 2025.
Right? We could look at the numbers in
there and say those are basically right.
Then the question is what's happened
since then? And I asked our treasurer to
look into that. And hold on one moment.
Let me just see if I can share my screen
here.
All right. Can you see this?
>> Yes.
>> So this is this is some of our funds and
bridgen culvert.
I'm trying to find it. Bridgen culvert.
I believe
if we haven't spent anything, we're
we're at 691,925.
But there's a TBD here. So I I'm not
100% certain of this figure,
>> Rob. That was one of the ones that I
could not I could not reconcile yet.
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> So, all right. Let's put it this way. We
have at least half a million in there,
right? Let's put it that way. Um, we put
in 175 last year. We're putting another
175 in. My understanding, however, from
talking to folks is that, you know, we
could spend a million dollars on one of
these things.
>> Yeah. Well, that was the number that
that I remembered being discussed is was
it was going to be a million-dollar bill
for the town.
>> Yeah. So, the idea here is if we're at
700 and we put in 350 two years in a
row, we'll have a million bucks in there
to to do something.
That's the idea. But yeah, I mean, no
question. The other thing, I'll just
mention this briefly. This is called
Bunker Hill. We obviously are done with
Bunker Hill. We're moving on to Long
Hill. that project
uh is one of those 100% reimbured
projects. We expect all the money back,
but we have to have money in there so we
can lay it out before we get it back.
When this is done, then the question
arises and we'll we'll get to it on on
the board. I believe if that project
completes and we don't have another
project like it, one of those big
reimbursement projects, you know, could
we take this and add at least some of it
into this? That's my other thing.
>> Rob, if I could just jump in.
>> Yeah, go ahead.
>> I mean, Eric always explained his road
plan before he left was is exactly that.
When the long hill is done, we'll have
that money and we'll be able to address
a number of coverts that can cost one to
two million dollars. It's crazy to put a
pipe in the ground, but that was the
whole purpose or the thought. The plan
was biz baza then you know uh bear swamp
and there's a whole bunch of culverts
that need to be replaced and I believe
that's exactly what he planned to do
once we get reversed move that into
bridging culvert.
>> I mean I think we got like five, six,
seven of them. So this yeah that was
that's exactly what I would plan to do
and then keep loading money in every
year and try to chip away at that.
That's our plan.
>> Uh you know so we looked at this this is
this was Lisa's document that again uh
everybody should take with a with the
understanding that Lisa's new and was
sorting through a lot of things. Uh and
we were trying to get our arms around
what we had in in various funds. what
where are we now versus where we are
going and we looked at this as a board
and that's why we made the capital
decisions that we made.
>> Okay. Yeah. I guess my next comment is
on the uh the road fund if you will
under capital again. And uh I remember
back at the tri board meeting we had in
February, I think it was Bob Hamburger
made a you know a pretty decent uh
remark at the end on how many miles of
roads we had and it cost I think a
million and a half dollars per mile to
uh redo a road and all that kind of
stuff. and his point was that we needed
to significantly increase the amount of
money going into the road fund and u you
know we're seeing that not there so uh I
just provide that to you as a comment
you know you're looking for feedback
>> um when when we went through on planning
and zoning you know the survey of the
town people you know roads and bridges
was far and away the number one concern
on the residents minds in terms of
taking care of
>> that's that's fair and I would simply
add to that that we do have some money
built up in that fund now this at this
point obviously it's just spring now
we're going to start spending this money
so I don't treat this as a real figure
or what I would because we're going to
spend some of it at least some of it
maybe all of it the other thing
everybody in town has to recognize is
that in our budget one thing that you
never
Every year we get a grant from the state
called Town A Road. Uh I forget the
exact amount, but what we show you in
this budget is what we put in
as a town from taxation,
but the state sends us a bunch of money,
too. We put those together and public
works uses them to the best of their
ability in a given year to do road work.
So when you see 385, that's not what
we're going to spend in road work next
year. we're going to spend significantly
more than that. Um whether that my
impression the last time well we talked
to the director of public works before
he left the last director
we talked about the road plan and where
we were on it and my impression and the
other board members can chime in on this
was that we were making good headway. Uh
the million some odd dollars per mile
number that you referenced. I think that
number if memory serves, bear with me,
is for a failed road, like when you have
to redo it.
>> It is. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, we have some of those failed
roads. No question. So, we know how many
miles we've got and how many years we
expect to get out of a road before we
get
>> We had we had a presentation last year
on this and we were making good progress
and we had a we had a pretty good plan
for continuing to chip away basically at
the roads that we could make get the
best bang for the buck on. But it's an
ongoing process. I mean, the original
plan was a 10-year thing. Um, we we're
getting there. But I mean, look, you
could give you could drop a million
dollars on me right now and I'd throw it
right in there and we'd spend it for
sure. No question.
>> Understand. I guess. And so
>> you mentioned one of my next concerns
that we don't have visibility with in
the budget is the grant money that comes
in. Uh, yeah. Which is a significant
amount of what we're spending. And that
would be somewhat helpful I think if we
had better visibility on that so that we
knew how much we got you know from a
revenue source outside of that even if
it was a look back because we don't know
what we're going to get in the year but
uh having some kind of visibility on
because the town should be able to save
some money because of all the grants
coming in. more grants, we should be
able to save more money and that would
be a good thing for us there.
>> I agree with you, Jed. I honestly there
are a couple of grants we get like
clockwork that I think should ultimately
and find their way into our revenue
line. Things like Town Aid Road and
there's another one called LOIP. The
acronym escapes me, but there are ones
we get every year. Then then there are
different grants where they're
contingent, right? We we put in for
them, we might not get them. Those are
harder to display because we don't know
if we're going to get them. But things
like Town A Road, it's very much like
education cost share. We show you
education cost share. We get it every
year. 2 million bucks. Okay. Town Road,
we get every year, but it's not in the
budget. Why? Honestly, we've never done
it that way. I've talked to Lisa a
little bit about this, our new
treasurer, and I think we probably
should do it that way. So, I agree with
you basically, and I I want going
forward. But I I can't do it now, but I
would like to get that in there going
forward. So you could see, okay, what
Andover actually spends on its roads is
a million dollars a year just to pick a
number, not the 385 you see in this
budget.
>> Yep. And that would be helpful when we
understand with the big bills coming
forward. Um I just wanted to add a
comment uh that you know when we talked
about in the capital the open space fund
um it shows a big increase you know it
had been routinely uh you know coming in
at 50,000 a year. Last year was a bad
year for the budget. It was projected at
zero. you folks uh you know decided to
put in you know $10,000 but
>> going up to 25 it looks like a big
increase when actually it's only half of
what we should be doing on an
>> starting to restore it. Yeah, you're
right.
>> It was it was we were trying to build it
up more than that. You're correct.
And I guess my last comment and and I
agree that uh you know keeping the
school good is so important for the
town, but it was interesting that uh in
the River East last Friday there was a
uh from the the Marboro superintendent
of schools talking about uh you know
their school budget and and they're
asking for you know one of the lowest
increases in the state uh with the
lowest funded school per pupil and
They're ranked as number four, which I
think is pretty good in the, you know,
the standing there. But, uh, um, I
think, you know, the people of town are
going to have a hard time swallowing 11%
school increase. And, and I know a
portion of that is because we are
growing. You know, we are adding a
school a grade, had to get new teacher
and all that, but uh,
that's still a pretty tough one. And and
when you look back six years, you know,
it just so happens that six years ago is
when about when we bottomed out. And so
I think the issue that we struggled with
back then was that the budget for the
school had kept going up even though the
population of the school had gone down
by about 50% at that time. So now we're,
you know, coming back up. But it doesn't
show the uh maintaining or increasing
the funding that went on when the
population went down by about 50% there.
>> Yeah, I think I I probably may maybe
before between now and the budget
hearing budget meeting rather maybe I'll
put together another slide that shows
the enrollment changes so everybody can
see that.
I do know just as a comment J I do know
that there were years where
I think if I remember correctly there
was about five years where there was
either a decrease or flat in those years
where the enrollment was going down if
you look back at that. Um,
>> okay. Yep.
>> So, it wasn't it wasn't continuing to
climb. It was going down. It was being
cut and it was being
>> I think there was like five years where
it was either cut or flat during those
decreases.
>> I I think and I think Jed's correct that
2021 2020 2021 was roughly where we
bottomed out uh in enrollment and that's
where you see that negative four. Um the
next year I think was flat and then we
start to climb again. But yes, that's
that's correct. We we we went from a
higher number than we have now many many
years ago. We dropped way down just when
my kids were in there and then we were
climbing back again. And I think m you
know the more we talk about this the
more I think it's there might be value
in including another slide to talk about
the the enrollment numbers.
>> And that's all I got for you. Thanks for
listening. Thanks for the presentation
and good luck.
>> Thank you Jed. I appreciate it. All
right, let me see where I am now. Um,
uh, Jody,
>> I'm just here to listen. Thank you. Nice
presentation.
>> Thank you. Um,
let's see.
Joanne, did I ask you before when I when
I had the agenda messed up?
>> Rob, no. I'm the one that brought up
that I thought it was going to go
different. So, I'm ready to talk. Um,
thank you. Go ahead.
>> And I also want to say that I was ready
to say that we had done this all
different, but what a great way to do
this. This is so much better. We've
never So, I want to give you guys props
for being prepared because I think the
town and the people are going to
actually see so much more. The
presentation that you gave tonight
usually was at the town meeting and
tonight was usually our open discussion
talking about budget lines ideas, but
great for all of you guys because I
think the town's going to get to see a
lot more. Um, and since, you know, I'd
love to say that I support all I I
definitely want everything to do well in
town, as you guys know, and I do have
the history of being on the board and
attending these meetings for at least
eight years. So, you know, I think it's
a high taxation, you know, to get
across. So, I hope that you guys can
prioritize what you think is most
important in this budget year and find
some room to to cut. Um, so again, the
only things that I want to bring up
having served on the board is just, you
know, I look at all the things that I
was comparing some of the budget numbers
to last year. So hopefully all of you
are privy to all of the salary lines
like we did last year and you know
making sure they're all accurate and
they add up to the 3%. I assume you're
doing that. Couple things that, you
know, I had questions on that maybe can
just get answered quickly or you can
look into is
I was surprised to see, you know, just
one the assistant
uh what do we call the the assistant
clerk, town clerk, and there was quite a
big increase there. And I know there
was, you know, some things done and and
increased it to a livable wage that used
to be the smallest one in town. So, good
for that position. But I'm not sure what
they're referring to with adjusting it
that big with theou.
I know when we didn't have a town clerk
and Carol resigned or retired, you know,
they had to do anou and up the salary
based on the assistant being the acting
town clerk. So,
I'm not sure if you've looked into that.
I don't want to talk about people's
personal things in in public, but you
know, I'm doing it appropriately by just
saying I would question that because I
know there was anou in place based on
that person being the acting clerk, but
maybe it would go to the union level.
Now, that's all. Another thing, I
support the administrative assistant for
the new town administrator coming in. I
know it was talked about in plenty of
the meetings that I've attended already.
I just wonder with all of your
discussions earlier putting a rate and
capping it at what used to be there at
the 19 hours and whoever fills it maybe
they offer the person that's there those
hours. I don't have any. I know it got
to be a personal thing going back and
forth in one of your meetings, but
whoever takes on that role, I don't
think you still need the stipend. So, I
wish there would be a little house
cleaning of just, you know, Jeff
Magcguire had mentioned in one of his
meetings, you know, once you put
something in a salary line, it's hard to
take it away. And I understand that
having seen it. So, I would hope that
would get looked at because even if they
keep the position as is and they don't
get to hire someone, they could still
pay the current person out of that big
line that you've all approved just like
the project manager has sat there, the
15,000 has sat there for several year,
you know, a couple years. So, I think
there would be money to pay that
position. Um, the other little thing,
um, let's see. No, let me look at my
notes.
Yeah.
Wait a minute. I guess Go ahead. Go on.
Go on. Finish up.
>> Did you have an answer to any of my
>> finish up? Finish up. Go ahead.
>> No, I mean I forgot this can be a back
and forth. So, if you have notes
>> No, no, no, no. I'm sorry. I was going
to jump in while you were looking for
something, but go ahead.
>> I mean, it's not it's not a lot. Again,
whatever you all prioritize this year as
being the priorities, I get that. And
just because you go out there and you
might have to cut a capital fund one
year to make the tax increase a little
more palatable for people that do live
on fixed incomes and we do have a lot of
aging population doesn't mean you can't
put it back in next year. I mean what
the town needs to know like you all said
nicely is that there are accounts. Just
because we put 185 in something doesn't
mean that's it. There might be a million
dollars in a fund. So when I talk about
cutting a capital fund, particularly
this year when we're getting a new town
administrator, they've lost so many
people at town hall. Everybody just
needs to get up and running and back to,
you know, status quo. It might be a good
year to go for a couple decreases there
to bring the taxation down. And then my
other thought on when you touched on the
RAM screen and that is a little strange
that there's been five years that they
forgot to return the money because they
have returned some money each year.
Don't want to call them out but thank
you Bill for Yeah. I mean
>> they miscalculated it. It's it's true.
>> Yeah. I don't I mean, you know, I used
to go to those meetings, too, and and
and try to talk about rationalizing, you
know, bringing that budget down, but
it's it's hard. It's a hard nut to
crack. So, you have to go where you can,
but finding knowing that we got money
back and auditors missing it is really
it's really sad. But since you have it,
that's a good thing. So, I'm hoping
another thing I don't want you to offset
the RAM budget. I think you need to keep
literal lines
visible for everyone, you know, because
of turnover and boards and different
things so that you'll all see it. But
you could perhaps put it on some kind of
deduction line that does help the tax
increase this year,
>> right?
>> I'd be in favor of, hey, it's been
taxed. The people have already done it.
Let's decrease some taxation that way.
So, um, one more quick look and then I
will, again, I'm not in favor of a 6.8
taxation increase. I would work hard to
find more. You know, that's just me.
That's how I roll. But I understand. I
have to respect what you all do. So,
good luck with everything.
>> All right. So, a couple things I just
want to mention real quick. First of
all, Joan, I am leaning I think we
chatted about this earlier today. I'm
I'm leaning towards what we talked about
with RAM where we show their levy. That
is the sort of true number and then we
do something else where we take out that
255. The other thing I did not mention
in my presentation and I should have so
everybody just hear this. I talked to
the board chair or the board of finance
of Hebrin about this and got his
thoughts and one of the things he has
asked the Ram folks and has not yet
received an answer at least had not
received an answer when I spoke to him
Monday afternoon was what about
interest?
Is that inclusive of interest?
>> Should be. So, you know,
>> my question is it or is it 265? You
know, so TBD on that, but
yeah, I I view the 255 as a floor. Let's
put it that way.
I think there's a case to be made. I
don't know for Andover, honestly, it's
probably not a huge number, but it's
something. And if they owed us that
money and they kept it and it was
sitting in an interest earning account,
what did it earn? Uh I don't know what
account they had. I don't I honestly
don't know. I I you know, we have that
the town has access to a stiff account.
I don't believe the school districts do.
So it might not be much money, but we're
asking the question that is a TBD.
>> Can I ask a quick question?
>> Yeah, go ahead, Louis. I'm just
wondering whether there's an uh anything
in the charter that mentions anything
regarding this type of situation if we
have to look into that as well.
>> Uh by all means take a look. I I I can't
recall off the top of my head that
there's anything like this in there
because well quite frankly this isn't
supposed to happen.
>> Correct. But I'm thinking more like um
corrections u what do they call it?
Missions or something like that. Um I'm
just kind of wondering
Yeah. Yeah.
Oh, we we can check. We could check. I I
hadn't thought of that. Uh, basically,
this is a mistake and they're correcting
their mistake,
>> right?
>> And it's a
>> the timing is sort of serendipitous.
It's great and all that, but it's also,
>> you know, it's it for me, it's about how
we display it
>> for the town. So you see kind of their
true number
and then how it and then how this comes
in and
affects your taxation. So that's what
I'm looking to do. But yeah, there's a
little bit of TBD here. It's the honest
truth.
>> Yep.
>> Um and I'm looking for answers. I I did,
just so everybody understands this, I
emailed them. I got that email. I got
home from work Friday night and I
immediately replied and said, "So,
what's your plan? Are you going to
reduce the number you're taking to
referendum by that amount?" You know, in
the end of the day, I think that's the
wrong answer. But I asked them that
question. What What's your plan? What
are you going to do? I don't think they
should do it that way. I think they
should take their real number to
referendum, you know, their actual the
the 4.2 2 million and then
give us an offset later,
but I don't have a response yet.
We'll see.
Okay. Um, moving on with public comment.
Jody,
>> you already asked, Jody.
>> I did. Okay. Sorry. I'm going out. I'm
going. This thing sometimes moves. I
apologize, Jody. Uh,
let's see.
Maybe Ron or
>> Oh, oh, oh. Oh. Um, why am I blanking?
I'm terrible. It'll come back. Uh, Ron,
hi everyone. Uh, thank you for, uh,
calling on me and, um, I appreciate
everything that the board of finance
does. I know it's voluntary group and
you work hard on this budget and
everything. I'm just trying to
understand stuff here. Um people are
saying that there's no cut in the school
budget and they're asking for 11%.
And I'm just trying to understand it.
This the $90,400 for the um the
psychologist, is that a a permanent
position that they're looking to do or
>> That's a full-time that's a full-time
position. Um, I asked the superintendent
>> for more information on that. Uh, hold
on one moment because I I asked her, you
know, because the question had come up
in board discussion
uh earlier today.
>> Valerie's on the line if you wanted to
ask her for
>> Yeah. And we can we can actually have
Val speak to it, but I also have her
email here that we could talk about. But
um so so all right, let me let me put it
this way. Let why don't you finish your
question to the extent that you haven't
and then maybe we'll we'll bring in our
subject matter matter expert and answer
it.
>> Okay. Because yeah, we need to pay these
people. I I agree the teachers need to
get their their raise that they're
contracted for and all of that. And I'm
firmly, you know, I believe we should
have a good education system, but not an
overkill. You know, we're talking about
the t the car taxes are out of rate
right now and we got it separated where
we we used to be always below it. You
know, there's a lot of things that are
out of whack. And I'm thinking, why
don't we ar why why aren't we sharing
another psychologist with another town?
So, it'll cost us less because the
increase in their benefits was
substantial, right? So, we're going to
have to pay this psychologist benefits
if we're going to hire them full-time, I
would think.
>> I think they're already there. But, um,
again, I'm going to defer to Val. Uh,
Valerie, would you like to speak to the
psychologist issue?
Let's see if we can get you on here.
>> I see you unmuted, Valley. But
>> you're muted, but I don't see you. Yeah,
and I don't hear you.
>> Which we've had that issue before.
>> We've had this before. I don't know why.
>> Gallery.
>> That's okay. I just was asking a few
questions.
>> No, no. Ron, I want to get you the
answer. And the thing is the the person
who's best able to answer your question
is actually here tonight. So, I'd love
>> might be able to answer that question.
cuz I I I think there are multiple
people who ask
>> Can I jump in and just ask a quick
question for clarification about the
psychologist position while we're
sorting this out? So, it seems like
based on the email that we received
today that the position is currently
under a grant for a mental health
specialist at 27.5 hours and we're
looking to hire a full-time
psychologist for probably 40 hours at
90,000 plus with benefits,
>> right?
>> Is that a fair comparison for me to
make?
>> No.
>> Hold on one moment. I'm I'm trying to
get because I I read the same email, but
I read it very very quickly.
>> Okay,
>> Belle's logging back in to try and
answer your questions. I I'd like her to
address it directly. If she can't, I'll
I'll read her email. But yeah, I mean, I
know we had a partial grant for this
position. I also know that we have some
AHM services that
>> kind of factor in. Um, but I'm hoping
Val could get her login back in and
we'll we'll address it because it's a
good question and it's a valid question
and multiple people have raised it. So,
>> thanks Rob.
>> No, fair enough.
>> And we lost the grant, right? A $40,000
>> 45 I think $4,000 we lost.
>> So, we're kind of back to zero the way I
>> And did we know about this beforehand
before this year came up that So, we
could have kept that grant by I don't
know. I'm just asking because now
>> I think the grant ran out.
>> The grant ran out federal grant and it
was for three years and it expires on
June uh 29th of 2026. So the grant is
over and that's fair. That's fair.
>> Yeah, it's fair. Who applies for the
grants? Is it the superintendent who
applies for these grants or Yes. Is that
>> okay?
>> This is Joan. Val can't get on. I can
speak to it. But I do think if she can
get on, she should she could.
>> Rob, can you hear me? I guess.
>> Okay, great. All right.
>> All right, Val, go.
>> Okay.
>> So, a couple of things. Um,
I'll I'll address the psychologist first
for you. So, a psychologist is a must
for us. As I said to you guys, there is
required support staff that's needed in
every school. There are two
psychologists in Hebrin. There are two
psychologists in Marboro and a social
worker. they I sent the board their
required tasks. We've talked about this
when we talked about the um the AHM
support that we receive that that that
few hours a week that we receive. Um
they are not qualified, certified or
trained to perform the tasks that the
experts within the school are required
to. There is testing that needs to be
done. It is not a position um that can
be reduced. Um it was reduced many years
ago when there was less uh student
population but the tasks that a school
psychologist has to perform they have to
perform the testing that needs to be
done. I sent you the numbers of special
education students, 504 students, the
IEPs. Every single year uh annually
there is um an IEP uh meeting a PPT uh
that takes place for students.
Triannually there is testing that needs
to be performed for those students. So I
I sent you the hours. There's in direct
service hours, meaning the IEPs that say
someone needs to meet with that child
for these goals. That was two full days
right there just for those direct hours.
That doesn't include the meetings. It
doesn't include the testing. It doesn't
include the consultations. So, that
definitely is a full-time position. And
yes, we have funded part of that
position throughout the last three and a
half years with those other grants. We
did talk about this last year that we
would be losing grants this year. Um,
but at the time we also said adding in
that fourth and fifth grade teacher that
we would then this year have to make up
for the loss of the grants as well as
the sixth grade teacher this year. So
unfortunately that is um that that's the
fact. Um, any questions on that one
before I
>> real quick, Mal, just because it was
asked earlier, just so we clarify, this
year, this budget year, the one we're in
now,
>> correct?
>> Is that person full-time?
>> That person is there um almost
full-time. The only reason why they have
about five hours a week less was because
when that position required the extra
hours from the students that that um
during the course of the year, some of
the adjustments for students IEPs were
made and that person had an hour a day
that they had to leave early to pick up
a child. So, we adjusted that hour um
for their schedule. But
>> that's almost full time. Uh they have
one hour less per day because of a
commitments to pick up.
>> So 35 was it 35 a week?
>> Um well no because we switched mid year
from them when when the additional hours
needed to be added the for student uh
needs for their IEPs. We did switch that
person because it was a savings to the
town from their hourly wage to into the
teachers union contract. And in doing
that, we no longer it's FTEES now. Um
>> Okay.
>> So, are they at are they at one FTE or
are they at 08 or
>> they're they're at one FTE
>> and that's that's current this year or
>> as of right now? Yes. It didn't start
off the year that way. They had um
slightly shorter.
>> Okay.
>> So, that's that. So, Rob, can I take my
turn now that I'm talking?
>> Yeah. Okay, good.
>> We may have more questions for you
later, but I just check on that because
Kim had asked that question.
>> Is Ron Oh,
>> is Ron still done? I mean, he might have
had other questions. So,
>> well, that's all right.
>> Okay, then the other question, Valerie,
is we have to hire another sixth grade
teacher. Is that did we increase the the
pupils or from fifth grade to sixth
grade or um does somebody move in that
has sixth grade students or uh the need
for another teacher or is it something
that we can just you know put more kids
in the classroom with another teacher?
I'm just trying to save money for
benefits and hiring another full-time
person. So last year, Ron, I'm not sure
if you were part of the process last
year, but last year we actually at that
time when we were looking at the
numbers, um we had grown and we knew
last year that it was going to be four,
five, and six because what happens is
years ago there were multiple sections.
In some grades, there were three
sections and we had dropped um even
prior to my arriving, they had dropped
in some cases to situations where there
was even one section uh for each of the
grades and then two. And when you get to
a point where you have more than 22
students, 23, 26, 28, unfortunately, you
wind up with a situation where you have
to make an educational decision. And
that educational decision is, and I I
don't want to be rude, so I'm going to
actually turn this on despite the fact
that Okay. Um, what happens is, let's
say you get to 27 or 28 students in a
grade.
>> The decision that you're looking at
then, Ron, is do you keep 28 kids in a
class and try to teach 28 kids or do you
take the two sections and have 14 and
14? And that's an argument that people
have had for years because they'll say,
"Well, classes of 14 are ridiculous." I
agree that classes should be bigger than
14 in an ideal situation. But if the
alternative is 28 versus two classes of
14, you take the two classes of 14. 28
students is not ideal. Anything over 22
students in an elementary school such as
ours is not ideal. I did include to the
board today those numbers so that you
can see the number of students that we
have that are special education with
IEPs. The number of students we have
with 504s in SRBI intervention. So we
have been growing. We've grown by 80
total students since my arrival. Um half
of them are K through six and so it it
is a necessary. What I will say is Rob
and thank you for your um presentation.
You included a lot of things tonight
that I don't think had been highlighted
in the six years that I've been here.
And one of them is that dedicated level
of commitment from the town of Andover
to increasing positions elsewhere in the
town. Since I've been here, the town has
done a fantastic job of making sure that
if you had a dedication to public works,
you guys added a public works director.
Fantastic. They're doing a great job. A
town planner tonight. You asked for an
assistant to the town administrator, for
a community director at the community
center. We've added a lot of positions
and I will say they're all good
positions, but the double standard can't
be there where we say the town of
Andover needs to add these positions to
the town side because it's important,
because it helps with the roads, because
it helps with the community center, but
then not have that same dedicated level
of commitment. If I was a parent, I
would expect if I'm going to pay the
taxes to have the public works director
and the assistant of the town
administrator that we're also going to
have that same level of commitments to
adding the appropriate number of
teachers. Um, you mentioned Marboro,
somebody mentioned Marorrow. Marorrow's
decreased this year, by the way. Their
enrollment has remained constant, but I
will tell you, I know this because they
used to have two principles and they're
going back down to one principal. So
that's a huge savings for them this year
and that is one of the factors that's
keeping that budget um there. Um the
other thing that I will add
>> can I just break in real quick?
>> Sorry. Sorry.
>> Barbara's in our consortium right for
healthcare.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So they're looking at that same
healthcare issue and it's that
consolidation of the of the admin that's
helping.
>> Yeah. So they had two co-principles for
their one elementary school and they're
now going to have go back to the one
principal. So, that's going to help
them.
>> Wow. Okay.
>> I know. They had two principles. Um, so
they tried it.
>> Let me just let me just go back to Jed
real quick and make sure he's done.
>> Ron, they're on. Ron, not Jed. Sorry.
>> Can I just
>> There's so many lines here. My
apologies, guys.
>> Rob, can I can I just circle back? I I
don't feel like I got a clear answer on
the hours for the psychologist. So, it's
currently at 27 hours a week and it's it
will go up to 40 hours a week. I I I
just want to get a clear answer so that
when I'm asked that question, which I've
been asked many many times in the last
two months, I can give them a clear,
respectful answer. Valerie, I'm not
questioning what you need for services
for the school. I just want to be able
to give them an answer. That's all.
>> Sure. Anybody who works in that position
has direct service hours whether it's a
speech pathologist, OTPT or uh a school
psychologist. The direct service hours
are the minimum required to fulfill uh
the compliance. Then over and above
that, there are the situations where
they're called in to um deescalate a
student. There are the situations where
they're responding to emails. There are
the PPT meetings, the consultations, the
testing. So when I sent you the email
today, I gave you the minimum that's
goes on their schedule every single week
regardless.
Then you have to add in the PPTs, the
meetings, the consultations, the
testing. There are probably some weeks,
Kim, that she's going to have a schedule
that's more than 40 hours and it's going
to have to wait whatever can't wait till
the following week.
>> What I so fair to say 30? No, it is a
40hour a week. It is a full-time job
>> currently.
>> Yes.
>> And and and if I'm could I just break in
here for a second if I understood what
what you said Val earlier was that this
used to be an hourly position and if you
moved to a salaried position.
>> Yes. And you know what Rob like
>> so when you are salaried you're you know
I'm salaried technically I work 40 hours
a week
>> and that is what it is whether I
actually work you know 38 one week and
42 another.
>> Yep. Just like teachers the thing is um
is we don't move a position to a
full-time position until we know that
that is in fact a very full-time
position. I don't have a full-time
special ed director. I don't have a
full-time OT. I don't have a full-time
PT. Um I don't have a lot of positions.
We have a lot of specials that are
part-time still. Um we don't have
full-time specials teachers in art in
library in um um who else? Library art.
Um
uh there's two more. Oh, Spanish. We
don't have them because they aren't
full-time positions right now. So, this
one is a full-time position. She is the
only one now that we're back up to that
number of students.
>> So, she's been working 40 hours a week
and part of that has been paid for by
that mental health uh specialist grant
that you let us know that it's a federal
grant.
>> Um and the other part of her salary has
been paid for through the general money
that the taxpayer sent to you.
>> Um Okay. And during that time, she
hasn't received any health benefits. And
>> we're not going to we've gone through
this, Kim. We we don't
>> we don't separate people out and ask
tell us who has what, who has a family,
who has this. We know that. Um just know
that we have received a grant for, you
know, the 43,000 for the three years,
the 30,000 for the other ones.
>> Okay. Um, and again, and again,
>> I think Ron still has some questions.
Rob, if if you want to just let
>> I'm happy to to finish up with Ron if he
if he has one more.
>> Just one a couple of quick ones and I'll
go fast. So, Valerie, are we going to be
applying for another grant to help out
for like the budget for the next year
and stuff like that? Uh, to be able
>> whenever there's grants, Ron, I apply
for them. Everybody knows that. Uh, I've
always applied for all the grants
available. They're dried up a little bit
with the current uh you know state of
affairs. Um but I apply for all of them.
Uh people in this town have known me for
six years to know that I've brought in a
lot of grants for a lot of things in the
past and and we're grateful every time.
>> Okay. Uh yeah, and thank you for
everything that you do, too. Uh one
other quick question is um I've been
hearing a lot of things back and forth.
The bathroom renovation that's going to
be done, is that coming out of the
budget for this year?
>> No, absolutely not. Actually, it's
coming out of the money that we put into
the capital account that we created
because we didn't have that. So, thank
you.
>> Can I speak to that? So, I I will speak
to that. So, we for a long time in this
town, we had no capital account for the
school. The capital the school does not
have its own capital budget. Like if you
go and you look at RAM and you look at
the RAM referendum, you'll see a capital
line item. you'll see things like that
or or in the town side you'll see a
capital uh budget for reasons that
escape me. Uh AAS has never had that.
We've never done it that way. And so
last year when there was a an o an
underspend two years back if you go to
the 2023 2024 year uh we got an audit
done and AAS had underexpended by a
significant amount and we took that
money and we plunked it down into a
capital account. It was a $400ish,000
and the town had put in$100,000.
So, we've got about a half a million
dollars in that account or we started
with it. Uh, we've spent some of it on
design work, but there is a a capital
account now for that money. So, my
understanding, my best understanding of
the bathroom project is it should easily
be done within the parameters of the
money we have already saved.
>> Okay. Do you know what the total cost of
that bathroom is going to be?
>> We don't know yet. Doesn't open till
Monday. We open them. We had a bid. We
didn't like it all that much. There was
a lot of push back. We've talked about
it and my understanding is the board of
ed went and looked at some additional
quotes and that is a little bit TBD, but
we should come in underneath.
I hope
>> the original I think the original
project cost was probably in the 400
range and we're hoping for lower than
that.
>> Okay. Very good. Thank you very much.
Appreciate it.
>> You're welcome. Thank you, Rob.
>> So, I had written a couple notes so I
could do this quickly. So, um Rob, as
you pointed out, um yes, uh the savings
for RAM is because they were down, um in
enrollment, they are actually seeing now
what we had seen, um you know, many
years ago as those kids get older. Um
>> are there.
>> Yes. So, um a few things. Um,
in terms of the town, you did uh you
were able to tell us that although the
overall uh increase to the town is
roughly 3 something, 6.12 of it is
operational. I just want to remind
people that I don't have an operational
and a capital as we just talked about.
So, um I don't have the ability to have
those two separate numbers. So the 6.12
for operational for the town um they
they are offsetting their number with
having a separation of capital and
operational. We are
>> um I don't have that I don't have that
ability. Um I will also you know say
thank you for uh mentioning that the
town doesn't pay the full boatload of
our budget. $2 million comes in in state
funding. $2 million in ECS funding comes
in and that money has to only be used
for educational expenses. Um Rob, you
had a great chart there that showed that
the town's budget in the last 5 years
has been about 28%
increase if everything goes through and
ours then would have been pretty close
to that at 29. Thank you for including
that chart. But I think it was Jed um
that brought up, you know, what had
happened to the budget prior to that
when the numbers were down and Bill I
think said, "Oh, I believe that there
was some flat funding." There was an
additional 5 years there where we lost
$418,000.
There was a huge loss there of an
additional 4.89%.
So, if Rob's chart had gone back four
more years, it wouldn't have been 16%.
Um, we would have had an additional 4.89
lost. And that was prior to my arrival.
And I do believe that, you know, uh, the
town's commitment at that time was, hey,
if there's a loss of enrollment, we're
going to rightsize the budget to reflect
that. And I believe that to have been
probably the best thing to do at that
time. But I just believe that now it's
time for us to rightsize it back up as
we've grown up. um you know in in
enrollment. Um I also believe when I
talk about that dedicated level of
commitment from the town to all of the
other positions that they have created
in the past six years, I will say that
I've gone through the plan of
conservation and development and um the
town planner who's also a new position
there. Um on page 94 even says we do
absolutely as a town have to make sure
that we have that same level of
commitment to looking at enrollment to
looking at seats within the school and
to making sure that we pay attention to
that as well. We got to rightsize our
budget again for that as well. Um and I
think there was one other thing that
someone had mentioned u that I wanted to
make I sure I hit on um but I can't
remember what it is now.
Um, so
>> I can always come back to you, Val. If
other questions come up here, let me
know.
>> If other questions come up, I will let
you know. Um,
>> the other thing I would mention since we
in during this discussion, we've been
talking about past years and everything
like that. Understand that the numbers
presented in those slides are nominal
figures, right? I did not adjust them in
any way for inflation or anything like
that. Those are nominal dollars. So just
FYI.
>> So I'm gonna move on.
>> One more thing. I'm sorry.
>> The 200 one more thing. The 255,000.
The other thing that I would
>> Yes. that I would ask the board of
finance to look into is that for 5 years
has been reported to the state as money
that we've spent on education. So, the
one thing that I would ask the board of
finance to look into is making sure that
um
since we've reported that like through
to the state that's part of the MBR that
there isn't any sort of caveat that says
that that money should and this might be
why RAM is saying we'll just give you an
offset. It's money that was taxed and it
was taxed for educational purposes be it
RAM or not. I think we should probably
look and make sure that that's not the
requirement that that's also still spent
somehow on on education and that may be
a factor. I know you said you were going
to talk to the other uh towns about
that.
>> Oh wow. Okay. I hadn't even thought
about the M issue. You and I need to
have another conversation about that.
And when I get when I get, we'll talk
again because that had not even occurred
to me.
>> That was already told to the state that
it was earmarked for the three towns
that 1.7 as part of the spending on
education. So I wonder if the state's
going to say,
>> but if it was an error,
>> it's still money that was taxed for
education. So,
>> I just worry that they say you can use
it however you want to offset AES or RAM
or whatever in the future. But I would
double check and make sure that they
aren't going to say if you now change
your mind and you opt not to use it for
somebody educationally,
is that going to be a problem? So, I
would just warn of that.
>> Yeah. I mean, okay. Thank you, Phil. Um,
okay.
>> I I have a I have a quick question. Go
ahead. Quick quick question slash
comment about that comment that
schools are allowed to keep 2% of their
budget. You know, underspent funds of
their budget and anything above and
beyond that. Any excess of that is
supposed to be returned to the town
which
generally is the way it happens. So I I
kind of look at it that way. It looks
like they had excess funds and they
never returned the money to the town.
So,
>> so Liz, when that happens, when that
happens, when the auditor does the
audit, they adjust that money and where
it goes.
>> So, if we had, let's say, $50,000 left
at the end of the year, over and above
our 2%. If you look at the new audit
that we have, it already says, you know,
for example, let's say the school has
50,000 left and they already move it to
that 2%. anything over the 2% they move
it back and say it is quote town money
but since Ram was holding that money and
not the town of Andover that money is
technically sitting as educational
dollars right now and all I'm saying is
it would definitely behoove the board of
finance before making any decisions to
put it anywhere all three towns is to
say if each of the three towns were to
move it into an a different account and
not offset any of the costs would we
have to change our our our reporting as
to what we did with that just so that it
it doesn't wind up in trouble.
>> Do you think it's something we should
talk about with our auditors?
>> Yeah.
>> I mean maybe it would make sense to off
to to adjust the MBR in because they've
been obviously overr.
I'm not saying we I'm saying perhaps the
calculation would I mean I know this is
a side topic but whatever. Obviously the
towns were getting overbuild so the MBR
is inaccurate based on that.
>> No MBR
>> MBR is how much you spend. They say you
have X number of kids. So there's you
know 250 kids and 129 kids. I think we
have let's say 330 between our K12. They
take what you reported that you spent on
your budget for RAM plus what you
reported you spent on AES in a year.
They add them together. They do their
magic. They say these are the number of
kids you guys have K12. This is how much
you spent. Here's our formula on what we
say is the minimum you have to spend.
And they look at the bottom and they say
K12. They say yes, you met it. Um and so
you met it based on what budget passed.
So Liz, the number that the state uses
is the reported budget number that you
reported for that year. And so that's
why I I I think all three towns are
probably going to have to do this, but I
think it's definitely an answer that we
need. It's a question that I had right
away. I'm like, hm, I wonder, you know,
if there's going to be, you know,
guidelines for what what they do with
that. I don't know if they could even
just write a check back. So it's just a
question that I would have. And I know
you're trying to do this right, Rob, and
thank you because you're doing a great
job.
>> Is if there's if there's more board
comments, let's go there. But otherwise,
I want to get to Marcy, I think, is next
on public speak. Anybody else? Liz, you
have more. Are you good? Okay. Bill,
anybody? Louise, we Okay, Marcy, I think
you're up next.
>> Yes. Hi. Uh, yeah. I just The only thing
I really wanted to say was I'm impressed
by the presentation. It was very clear
and concise. Uh very appreciated. Um I
did uh not surprised actually that the
town budget is not as high as it is
because it's not as high because we did
add a building community center. We
added some people. I completely expected
more of an increase and uh kudos for the
town for coming in uh where they did. So
>> thank you. I mean, yeah, some of the
answer to that one is is just that some
of those additional costs went in last
year. Um, but yeah. Um, okay. So, uh,
Sharon sent Rock.
>> Hey, it's finally my turn. Thank you.
>> You know, it's your fault for having an
S name, you know.
>> Yeah, I change that.
Um, so I I was primarily listening in
tonight um as a taxpayer, as a parent of
school age children um to support the
education budget. And the more I listen
um and into your words too, Rob, I'm
thankful for um how we've been funding
the tree fund and uh the roads. Um
because I too also recall several years
where uh we were without power for days
on end and you couldn't get uh you
couldn't exit your road in either
direction because there were trees down.
Um, and so with the increases to public
works, you know, if a tree goes down, I
feel like it gets picked up real quick.
And so, you know, I'm not stuck at home.
Um, so I appreciate um the the level of
commitment that's been uh given to the
town budget, but also um uh the school
budget is obviously important to me. Um,
the last thing I want to say is I just
would like to urge the board um to
adhere to the town charter as it's
written this time around and allow the
voters of Andover that opportunity to
decide whether or not they want to
support adequate funding for our
youngest residents. Um, that's all I got
tonight. Thanks. Thanks for all of you
for for your hard work. I'm realizing
how many hours uh particularly the board
of finance puts in this time of year
because I've been trying to pay really
close attention and so thank you um and
uh thank your families for um for
allowing you to uh put in all this time.
>> That's it.
>> Thanks Sharon. Uh okay.
>> I see Leanne Hutchinson sitting there if
you go in alphabetical order. I see.
Yep.
Hi, this is Han. Were you calling on me?
>> Yes, I believe we were. I'm I'm having
trouble hearing you, but go ahead.
>> Is that any better? A
>> little bit. Thank you.
>> Okay. Yes. Um, thank you for calling on
me. Um, yes, I don't have any comment at
this time.
>> All right. Thank you.
All right, folks. I think I hit
everybody. If there's anybody in this
meeting that I didn't get, you know,
speak up. Just shout it out. I I think I
got everybody, but I might have missed
somebody.
>> Did Did you do Jen um Mick Gold Rick?
>> I thought I did, but did I do her
before?
>> I think so. Yeah.
>> Oh, you did. Okay.
>> You did me before. I'm all set.
>> Oh, you're good. Okay. My bad. It
shouldn't have been before. That was my
mistake. I see your hand up, Joan. Give
me one moment. I I just want to make
sure that we've gone through everybody.
The phone number that's Leanne, right?
So that's the same thing because there's
a phone number here I see on my board.
>> Yeah. 7425475
I think.
>> And that is okay. So you're good. All
right.
>> Yep. All right. Um before we move on, I
guess Joanne, what do you have?
>> Very quick. I promise. Rob, I just my
only point that I had written down that
I wanted to say is just remember again,
I don't want to be the only descender
and hoping that you cut more. But
whatever whatever you end up, you know,
whatever you end up approving for this
budget, it's so key because that becomes
the new norm,
>> you know, whether it gets spent or not.
And it's so hard to get away from the
new norm, you know, and of course it's
going to get spent. So that's all you
know you're marrying the count to those
new level of expenses wherever they are.
So I do really appreciate cuz I've been
at all your meetings. I'm still very
involved and interested, you know, and
and thank you for all your hard work.
But it's really hard because when you
see those numbers increasingly going up
in the millions and millions and the
mill rate what it's going to be, it's
just, you know, wherever you could see
for prioritizing this year would be
appreciated for the town. Thank you.
You're welcome. So, uh, the other thing
I would mention,
>> did
you did you have a chance to talk after
our presentation? I can't remember.
>> I did. Thank you. Thank you.
>> I'm I'm I didn't really have anything to
add earlier because I was just kind of
taking it all in. I had jumped in
halfway through. But, you know, I think
I need to echo the support of everybody
saying that we need to invest not only
into the infrastructure and the
improvements in town and the positions
in town to keep good people employed in
town, to keep great people serving in
volunteer positions in our town. Um, but
we we absolutely do need to invest in
every generation in this town, not just
the seniors in the community center, but
the students in the school. And as a
parent uh and as someone who's really
become quite committed in this town, you
know, I think it's great to try to see
the even distribution of resources all
across the board. So, I thank you all
for your efforts that
>> you started it.
>> Uh there a couple of things I'll mention
uh just to the public before we move on
a little bit uh is there's a couple
other moving parts here. So, one of the
things that the board of finance has not
done this year with this budget at this
time.
Last year we pulled $190,000 from fund
balance from our savings if you will to
reduce taxation. We have right now the
number on our budget is zero. We're not
pulling from fund balance. That said,
our fund balance is up a bit. It's about
$2.1 million. Now we have up in savings.
That's roughly if memory serves 15% of
our budget. Um there is to the extent
that this tax increase is unpalatable to
the town. One of the options that the
board of finance has and has not yet
availed ourselves of is to look at that.
We haven't done it this year. We
generally try to avoid it if we can. Uh
we've used it modestly in the past. This
time we haven't used it at all as yet.
So there just one point to make. Other
than that, yeah, go ahead.
>> I said that there is a goal usually or a
specified goal of 12%, right?
>> It's changed. Uh the last time we talked
to Eric about this, I don't know if you
remember, it was about a year, maybe not
a year ago, maybe six six, seven months
ago, we had a meeting and Eric was
talking to us about this. It used to be,
let's rewind the clock, there was a time
like 10 years ago where we had a huge
percentage built up because our town
budget was down. We weren't actually
properly funding our town and we had a
lot of savings. And so
we were told basically you ought to
spend that down. A because you need to
invest in your town and B because if you
have too high a savings
in a tough budget year at the state
level, they might look at your town and
say, "Oo, you've got plenty of money.
You don't need our money." But then we
did that and at the time the the goal
was uh I want to say you're right, it
was it was maybe like 12 or 13%.
However, the last time we talked to Eric
about this issue before he left, he
mentioned that the new state guidelines
were roughly to have 16th of your
budget. So that's that's 16.67 in
reserve. He then added a caveat and that
caveat was well that's for a lot of
towns in Connecticut that
we don't have all of the risk factors
that a town on the coast has. a town in
a river valley has. We don't have the
flood risk. We don't have this that the
other. So it might be just fine for us
to have say 15%.
We're at 15%. We're at 15 something.
We're right about there. So we're we're
more or less where we ought to be.
Frankly,
my point would be the difference between
2 million and 2.1 million is not a huge
number. If we are attempting to
close the gap and get to a passable
budget, we could look at that issue.
However, everybody should understand
that when you take from a capital,
sorry, a savings account like that and
you put it into a budget to cover to
help out with taxation or what have you,
it's a oneshot kind of a situation.
You're not it's not revenue, right? You
you're pulling from your savings. So, we
had chose not to do that. We chose to
bring this budget before this hearing
and I think we'll likely take this
budget um to town meeting without that.
But that is an option that we can
ultimately use
if that makes sense.
So I guess what I would say here is
looking at the uh our agenda here uh you
know we've had comments from the public
we can close or continue. So I guess my
thought is if we want to continue
if there is anybody in the public who's
already spoken that has thought of
something else they want to raise I I
would say you know I'd give it a little
more time if you want to come back and
double dip uh let us know otherwise the
board can chat a bit and then honestly
we're going to have another meeting
tomorrow night where this board is going
to sit down and kind of take the
feedback we've gotten tonight and some
of the questions we've gotten and think
about it and make some decisions.
Would anyone from the public like to
speak again for speak now or forever
hold your peace?
All right, board members. Um I think we
have a couple things we could tighten up
in our presentation. And I think we have
uh you know, Bill and I talked earlier
today about a line item that I'm not
100% sure about. This was the overtime
budget. Bill, do you want to you want to
bring that up a little bit? Well, I and
maybe I don't know if Liz or Kim or um
Nick any or um Heather, anybody
remembers Lou Louise, we we talked about
the overtime budget for snow and there
was overtime budget just for public
works. And we said I volunteered and
said I'll call Eric tomorrow and find
out what's the difference and why so
much. He basically explained it to us
saying that, you know, when a tree came
down, like I I said, a tree came down
last weekend, um, not this past weekend,
but the weekend before on our road and
two road crew guys came up on a Saturday
and had to clean it up. They were there
for a couple hours. And he goes, "That
kind of stuff happens a lot." Or if
there's a construction project where,
you know, we have out of town
contractors working, they work usually
to 4 or 5:00. And so instead of getting
off on that short time our guys get
done, they would have to stay on that
road site while that project's being
worked on. So there's a lot of overtime
that goes beyond snow overtime. Anyways,
I saw a decrease in the budget where it
was cut down to 5,000 and I didn't think
we voted on that. I thought we waited.
We said we would wait until we got an
explanation from Eric. So, does anybody
remember whether or not we actually
voted to cut that to 5% or were we going
to wait until we got the answer that I
got from Eric? I don't know if anybody
remembers that. I went back through some
some past uh minutes and I didn't find
it and some of the minutes aren't really
like our last couple meetings aren't
really there. So, but Kim, you have your
hand up. Did you have a thought?
>> I not about this.
>> Oh, all right. We'll get to you.
>> I can look back through my notes about
this. I I don't recall a vote because I
do take good notes,
>> but I clearly on my spreadsheet anyway,
this is my personal one that I have
saved on my drive.
>> I clearly reduced it
>> and
>> I did also.
>> Yeah. So,
>> I don't think I would have done that
without a vote, but I can't remember the
vote.
>> I don't remember having a vote. I
remember specifically saying we're going
to wait till I got an answer.
>> Let's put it
>> just like
>> Just like I got the answer. I'm sorry,
>> but he was there in the meeting, right?
So,
>> yeah. The question is, did we
fully understand what he was telling us?
Like, is this is are you is what you're
telling us, Bill, is that this is
potentially problematic.
>> I I think it could be problematic. And
and again, I thought that and the other
thing I called uh and I always forget
her name from the town election
committee. Does anybody remember I
talked to
is it Lynn?
>> Linda Derek.
>> Linda Derek. Thank you so much, Louise.
Uh, I talked to Linda Derek and she said
the reason for that increase, and again,
we didn't vote on cutting that large
increase in meals because we weren't
sure why there was such a large
increase. And we said we're going to
hold off again until I talked to her and
found out that they have so many more
people that have to work because of the
additional early voting, mail-in voting.
Uh, we have two um, you know, the
Democratic and the Republican primaries.
it's going to be a big expensive year
and they get paid because they work long
days for dinner. So again, those were
two items I thought we held off on doing
anything to until we got an answer um on
those things. So that's why I was
surprised when I saw the overtime cut
for public works and I just I don't if
anybody else remembers doing that vote.
I don't remember the vote.
I'll be I'll be honest. My brain is a
little bit mush, so I don't recall the
vote. However, I know I clearly I
recorded it here and Lisa did, too. So,
we must Yeah, I marked it in my notes. I
crossed out the amount it was,
>> but I think we should maybe revisit
tomorrow night. Um, that's my take. We
This is here. We should revisit that
tomorrow night because this is a
significant
we cut it by a lot.
>> A lot
>> and you know and
>> I thought that was because look at the
previous two years were spent. I thought
>> this was the issue. I think you're right
>> this year.
>> Yeah,
>> that's probably it.
>> Maybe that's what it is. It is still an
increase. Yeah, if you think about it
this way, if we spent if we're if we're
on track to spend, you know, four grand.
>> Yeah.
>> And we put five, it's not so bad.
>> I don't have a problem with it. I just
wasn't sure.
>> Yeah. And it was a large request. I
guess this is the issue is, you know,
that request right there.
>> You know, that's based on something. And
we looked at this and said, "Nah, let's
do that. Now that you Now that you guys
are helping me jog my memory, it may be
fine, but maybe we just talk about it
one more time tomorrow night.
I'm going to stop sharing just I just
wanted to do that. All right, Kim, you
had something you wanted to raise.
>> Yeah, I do. I I want to circle back to
um some comments that were made earlier
and it's I think it's important that we
talk a little bit about the funds that
the school has. um access to. So we know
we understand that they get you know a a
fairly decent amount of money each month
about 10 payments. There's a 2%
non-lapsing account that the school
gets. They get a substantial amount of
money on grants which I think is
extremely important. State grants,
federal grants, there's a Norton fund.
Um, I I just think that we need to keep
that in mind when we talk about the
budget and we're transparent with our
taxpayers.
These are fairly decent amounts of money
sitting in these accounts and, you know,
potentially
the bathroom, the capital fund, which
they should definitely have. They should
fix their bathrooms. I'm totally for
that. Maybe that'll come in a little bit
lower. But these are all funds that are
sitting in addition to what the
taxpayers
spend each year
to pay the bills at the school.
>> Y
>> that that's a question that I get a lot
um during the course of my day after
these meetings during the course of my
week. And
it's important that I think that we make
this known.
>> Okay. And and Sharon, I understand your
your con Rob, let me finish. It's
extremely important to me that you guys
know that I care about kids. Sharon, I
totally agree with you. Bata, I totally
agree with you. It's very, very
important that we do the best for our
kids. But I think that we have to be
sure that we make it clear that there is
a substantial amount of money in other
accounts
that are in the control of the school.
Some of them, the board of finance and
the school can control, but
they're there. That's all I have to say.
Don't want to get into a big
disagreement with everybody tonight.
That's all I want to say. Okay. I I just
want to say um because you brought up
the two 2% non-lapsing, my recollection
from the audit numbers, and this is an
audit that's not complete, but should be
complete pretty soon. I think we can
take the numbers in there reasonably. I
think what was in there at the end of
2425, so that gets you to June 30th,
2025, was about $250,000, like 248,
something like that. Then that year,
that is the last year the AS will have
an underexpend. They will be able to put
I think it's 87,000
into that account. So you get from
you get to 355
max. I think
after that my understanding is also that
during this budget year the budget year
we're in now 2526
that they plan to draw down from that
such that it may more or less net out
and so you might be left with something
like 250 275 in there but I'm going to
let Val speak to it because she's got
her hand up but um just that is
absolutely true there is a 2% nlapsing
account that the school has.
The issue is the same for when we look
at our capital or rather our unexpended
fund balance and what we can draw from
it or not draw from it is that it's a
oneshot deal. So, let me let me ask you
Val, go ahead. Why don't you talk to
that?
>> So, um you know, I didn't expect us to
be talking about those tonight, but here
we go. Um, so when you look through the
audit, the town does have 57 funds on
the town's side. Um, and there's only a
couple of them that are ours. Um, we did
talk before about the fact that, you
know, there's over a million dollars
that gets put this year into or just
about a million dollars to fund the
townside funds. And it's a good thing.
It's because you need that moving
forward. The school only has a couple of
funds available. We have the general
fund that you guys fund us with our
allowance every month. And then we have
the 2% non-lapsing account. Yes, as Rob
said, the 2% non-lapsing account has
$250,000 in there right now. Keep in
mind that that is um the only one of the
lifeline accounts for us. Last year when
the school was cut $160,000,
we knew going into this budget season
that we would be in a deficit. On our um
agenda for this next week, um Jod will
be asking for, and we just talked about
it today, $97,500
to be transferred. That is what our
anticipated deficit this year will be.
97,500
because the 160,000 was cut last year.
As Rob mentioned, it's a oneand done.
That's the only chance we get from those
accounts because we're going to be at a
deficit this year, which means we can't
refund that 2% account. If we wind up
having to empty that out next year
because we get a reduction to the 11%
ask, that's gone. That's it. If we get a
student that needs to be outplaced, if
we get an emergency situation in the
school, we don't have all of those other
funds with a million dollars in them.
That's the one account that we have. The
second account that you mentioned, Kim,
so there's only two of them. The second
account that we mentioned um was a
capital account. Board of Finance
controls that account.
>> I understand that. I said that, Valerie.
>> Yep. And so that is a capital account.
It cannot be used for operational
expenditures. And so there is no other
account for us to use. The Norton
account is something that I had been um
working on for the past two years. the
Norton account. Um I worked on it, you
know, as as soon as two months ago. The
Norton account, it has investments in it
that um the town is going to have to
work with us on. It's probably going to
take a year and a half or so to be able
to do because the interest that was
supposed to be earned on that had not
been being put into our account on a
monthly and quarterly basis. So, um I
don't want to call out Core Lisa and
say, "Hey, Lisa, just remember this is
something that's going to be on our
radar." But at some point, yes, we are
going to have to look at that account
and see what we can turn in to make
available, but it's actually right now
mostly in the form of Bank of America
stock and there's about 70,000 that'll
be available in that account.
>> Okay. I was going to ask you that. I
appreciate that information. Thank you,
Valerie.
>> Before Before we move on, I just want to
ask, is Norton earmarked? Is that is
there specific stuff you can use it for
and not use it for?
>> It so Norton is it started off with
$1,000. I'll put the history out at some
point. That's an interesting um uh
concept that Mr. Norton donated, but
that is earmarked for um non budgeted
educational expenses that the school
deems necessary. I have receipts for
that account all the way back to like
the 1970s. uh they bought a typewriter,
they bought a computer back in the late
70s, early 80s, they bought archery
equipment for the school, they bought
the kiln years ago that were there. Just
things that came up that the school and
the board of education had on their wish
list decades ago. Um and um that was how
they were able to fund those uh things
on list. So yes.
>> So the issue basically is we don't fully
understand right now how much is in
there but we have kind of a minimum that
we know is in there.
>> We do, but we have to go through the
process because it was a little
mismanaged over the decades on the town
side and um it was hard to even figure
out. It's going to be a project, trust
me. But um there's about 14,000 I'll say
the word cash in the account. Um Lisa
can look that up. um in um the interest
that was in there, but in terms of
dividends and stuff, it's it's pretty
messy right now because for years the
town was not putting that in there. They
were throwing it back into the general
fund. So, it's going to be a project for
us to figure out how much is owed to
that and then to figure out the board
would have to vote to approve to take
the 1,310
shares of Bank of America stock and sell
them.
>> Rob, I have been working on that.
>> I know, Lisa. I I didn't want to bring
it up. of my poor. She's got so much
going on.
>> Well, those are some of the funds that I
could not get to. I got the capital
balance, but I could not get to the
funds.
>> Lisa, believe me when I tell you, I
understand.
>> I see the dividends. They are there. So,
it's just a matter of putting them in
the right place
>> and I don't have all the answers yet.
So,
>> you I think I think you may have
answered this really quickly, but I want
to circle back because you talk really
fast, Valerie. Um, do you anticipate a
deposit going into your non-lapsing
account this year from the 2425 audit
that Yeah,
>> the one that just ended.
>> Yeah.
>> Yes, we do.
>> 87,000ish, I think,
>> 87,000.
>> 87,000. Okay.
>> I think it's 87,000 and change. I forget
the exact dollar number. If you look at
Actually, wait, hang on. Lisa, you had
it on your chart. I think
>> 86. Yeah, it's 86.
>> Yeah, you had you had it. you had it.
I'm going to find it.
>> 961.
>> And so the other the other question, and
please don't shoot the messenger here,
but this is asked of me a lot, and I
want to be clear with everyone. The prek
tuition that you take in, you've given
us some numbers in the um board of
finance budget about that. Did that
tuition goes back into your fund,
correct? It doesn't go out into the
general fund.
>> The preschool tuition is a separate
account because that pays those aid
salaries. I understand that, but I I I
want you to be specific with your
answer. The tuition goes back into your
into your funds to pay your bills, etc.,
etc. It doesn't go back out into the
town's funds. It was It didn't What does
he mean back into? It didn't start off
in the town funds. The tuition comes
>> at the start of a year. The tuition
comes in and the grant funding comes in.
We pay the eight salaries. We pay the
supplies and that's it. You're you're
not allowed to like have a savings
account with that. Like you can't say,
"Oh, there's an extra hundred thou." No,
like it's the money.
>> I wasn't I wasn't implying that at all.
I was just
a wash.
>> At the end of the year, it's a wash and
then it moves over to the next year.
>> Okay. Can you Do you have a rough
guesstimate of what you bring in in the
bottom of every single financial
statement every month? It says 249,000.
Um and it's always in our packet.
$249,000 is this year's anticipated
tuition. $123,000
is the anticipated money that comes in
from the early start grant and $65,000
comes in from the Smart Start grant for
a total of $4.99. You minus the eight
salaries. There's just under $30,000
that is there for the rest of the
supplies for prek and then it's a wash.
>> Okay. All right. I really appreciate you
going through all these numbers with me
tonight. Thank you very much.
>> Uh since we since we're talking about
it, just real quick, Val, uh I I am
remember that the state of Connecticut
is building out a universal prek system
program
>> that is supposed to take effect what?
>> 2728.
>> Yep.
>> So, not this coming school year, but the
next one.
>> Correct.
>> Okay. Thanks. Just wanted to make that
clear because I mean that's going to be
a potential game changer. We're going to
have to all adjust to that,
>> whatever that is.
>> Don't worry. I'm on so many meetings
right now, Rob. And you know, I uh the
trajectory I think
>> Oh,
>> yeah.
>> While I have you, one more question.
Val, the the healthcare consortium, the
21%
um
there's no there's there's no indication
that there's any wiggler in that.
There's no there's no hope.
>> No. As a matter of fact, Rob, if I'm
being
really honest, the difference from 15,
we made our budget at 15.
>> So, we are already going to have to eat
close to 68 to 72,000
in our budget someplace because it went
up to 21 and it would have brought our
budget to 12%.
>> I I was going to get to that one, but
what I was going to ask is
>> and Heather was on one of those calls.
Heather, thank you for for logging on on
behalf of the town. Um but it is it's a
steady I mean there's are we doing
things in the consortium to try for next
year we are bringing in East Hampton um
the consortium itself is going to try to
do anything and everything but right now
that's that's just the ins and outs.
I mean, yeah. I mean, look, a lot of
people are just, you know, the the
thought is like, God, 21% is so bad.
Isn't there anything we can do? And, uh,
I know you and I have talked about it,
but
>> Heather was on that meeting. Go ahead,
Heather.
>> I I was going to say I went to that
meeting and they said the town of East
Hampton is coming in, which is is
helping because their claim experience
is a little bit better and their large
claims, but there's a few there's a few
large claims that have come. I don't
know what town or anything. Um, and they
could maybe go down to like 19, but
they're going to keep it at 21 cuz they
need to keep the reserve in there to pay
the claims um to hopefully help in
future years. And then the stop loss,
which is the large claim piece, might
come down a little bit, but it's not
going to bring it's not going to bring
the 21 to 15 or anything. It's just a
small piece of it. So,
>> this year it's open for next year,
though.
>> I mean, that's just such a blow. So,
that that's why I ask about it. Um,
>> because that one's killing us. It's just
a huge chunk of all this.
>> Yeah.
>> And it and there's no other way like
>> Okay. Okay.
>> It's they're self-funded. So, it's
basically the claims come in and that's
it is what it is.
>> Yeah. It I mean this is a part of
insurance that I It's funny because I'm
in insurance. This isn't my my ba wick
>> and this is all about estimated losses
and everything like that, right? And and
looking at your losses last year and
this isn't something I do. I'm not an
underwriter. So
>> I am. I am.
>> You are.
>> That's why I told Heather, Could you go
to the meeting?
>> I am but a humble claims handler,
Heather.
I don't worry about all that wacky stuff
you do. I read the policy.
>> Um anyway, so I just, you know, I see
something like 21% and I want to pull my
hair out. Like that's just
>> is there nothing we can do? And what you
guys are telling me is unfortunately no.
Um, I don't love that answer, but I
appreciate you
trying.
Um, further board discussion or should
we wrap this up, guys? Cuz we have a
meeting tomorrow
>> tomorrow night. So,
>> we have we have discussions to have
tomorrow night. And by the way, I am
going to try to get Nick on uh but he's
traveling. I I don't know where he is
exactly, but he's he's uh it's going to
be difficult for him to join us. So, it
may be just the six of us,
>> okay?
>> Which is, you know, is what it is.
>> Uh, okay. So, folks, I, you know, I want
to thank everybody who came here tonight
and listened to us go on and on about
this stuff. Appreciate your involvement
and your comments. Some of you had
lengthy ones, some of you had short
ones, but I appreciate them all. And we
do have a meeting tomorrow night for
those who want to watch us do our thing.
And then the next one we do have right
now at least we have a meeting set for
Wednesday the the 8th rather. Uh
it's conditional. We we could decide not
to hold it, but I I suspect we will. And
then we have the 9th, which is the
meeting, the big one in the gym in
person to go through this again. I'll
give my presentation again. It'll be
tightened up. I won't have my little
question marks and and that sort of
thing and we will vote as a town as to
whether or not to send this thing to
referendum.
So, with that said, do we have on the
board a motion to adjurnn?
>> I'll make a motion to adjourn.
>> I'll second.
>> Louise and Kim. Bill, you
>> all right? Louise to adjourn. Kim
seconds. Bill's ignored.
All right. Uh, Liz.
>> Yes. Okay. Louise.
>> Yes.
>> Bill.
>> All right. Heather.
>> Yes.
>> Kim.
>> I'm a yes, too. Sorry.
>> I saw you. Thumbs up.
>> I saw your thumbs up.
>> Kim.
>> Yes.
>> Yes. And myself. Yes. I want to thank
everybody again. Have a good night. We
will be back here. Same bad time, same
bad place.
Tomorrow.
>> Tomorrow.
>> Okay.
>> Bye.
>> Don't forget to uh the recording.